Matrix Factorization (#15)
greenelab/knowledge-graph-review: content/04.network_applications.md

We group methods for producing low-dimensional representations of knowledge graphs into the following three categories: matrix factorization, translational methods, and deep learning (Figure {@fig:unifying_techniques_overview}).

![
Pipeline for embedding knowledge graphs into a low dimensional space.
Starting with a knowledge graph, embeddings can be generated using one of the following options: Matrix Factorization (a), Translational Models (b) or Deep Learning (c).
The output of this pipeline is an embedding space that clusters similar node types together.
](images/figures/unifying_techniques_overview.png){#fig:unifying_techniques_overview}

#### Matrix Factorization

Matrix factorization is a technique that uses linear algebra to map high dimensional data into a low dimensional space.
This projection is accomplished by decomposing a matrix into a set of small rectangular matrices (Figure {@fig:unifying_techniques_overview} (a)).

> Notable approaches in this category are: Isomap [@doi:10.1126/science.290.5500.2319], Laplacian eigenmaps [@doi:10.1162/089976603321780317] and Principal Component Analysis (PCA) [@doi:10/bm8dnf]/Singular Vector Decomposition (SVD) [@doi:10.1007/BF02288367].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notable methods for matrix decomposition include Isomap [@doi:10.1126/science.290.5500.2319], Laplacian eigenmaps [@doi:10.1162/089976603321780317] and Principal Component Analysis (PCA) [@doi:10/bm8dnf]/Singular Vector Decomposition (SVD) [@doi:10.1007/BF02288367].
```

> In this section we discuss approaches that utilize the above methods to project knowledge graphs into a low dimensional space.

Reviewer: I made the other one more about methods, since you say approaches twice in succession and use the "methods" term here for them

> SVD [@doi:10.1007/BF02288367] is an approach that can project knowledge graphs into a low dimensional space.

Reviewer: Isn't SVD much broader than this? Would it be better to talk about an approach that uses SVD as the lead in to this paragraph?

The input for this technique is an adjacency matrix ($A$), which is a square matrix where rows and columns represent nodes and each entry represents the presence of an edge between two nodes. 
This adjacency matrix ($A$) gets decomposed into three parts: a square matrix $Σ$ and a set of two small rectangular matrices $U$ and $V^{T}$.
This values within $Σ$ are called singular values, which akin to eigenvalues [@doi:10.1007/BF02288367].
Each row in $U$ and each column in $V^{T}$ represents nodes projected onto a low dimensional space [@doi:10.1007/BF02288367; @doi:10/bm8dnf].
In practice $U$ is usually used to represent nodes in a knowledge graph, but $V^{T}$ can also be used [@doi:10.1007/BF02288367; @raw:Jiezhon2018].
Overall, SVD is a universal algorithm and is typically used as a baseline to compare to other approaches [@arxiv:1906.05017].

> Laplacian eigenmaps is an approach that projects knowledge graphs into a low dimensional space while preserving the graph's local structure.

Reviewer: Is this similar to SVD or is this specific to knowledge graphs?

The adjacency matrix is converted into a laplacian matrix ($L$) by subtracting it from the degree matrix $L=D-A$.
Once the laplacian matrix is constructed, this algorithm uses linear algebra to calculate eigenvalues and eigenvectors from the matrix ($Lx = \lambda Dx$).
The generated eigenvectors represent nodes projected onto a low dimensional space [@doi:10.1162/089976603321780317].
A number of approaches have used variants of this algorithm to perform their own node projection [@raw:gongreplearn; @doi:10.1109/TKDE.2016.2606098; @arxiv:1905.09763].
Typically eigenmaps work well when knowledge graphs have a sparse number of edges between nodes and struggle with denser networks [@arxiv:1906.05017; @doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005621; @arxiv:1905.09763].
A future direction is to adapt these methods to scale to knowledge graphs that have a large number of edges.

Matrix factorization is a powerful technique that uses a matrices such as  an adjacency matrix as input.
Common approaches involve using SVD, Laplacian eigenmaps or variants of the two to perform embeddings.

> Despite reported success, the dependence on matrices like an adjacency matrix creates an issue of scalability.

Reviewer: With respect to CPU, memory, all of the above?

> As knowledge graphs asymptotically increases in the number of nodes and edges, these approaches would be hard to utilize.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Furthermore, these methods treat all edge types the same, but a possible extension would be to incorporate node and edge types as sources of input.

Reviewer: The methods like SVD, etc, or the specific approaches using them for knowledge graphs?

Matrix factorization is a technique that uses linear algebra to map high dimensional data into a low dimensional space.
This projection is accomplished by decomposing a matrix into a set of small rectangular matrices (Figure {@fig:unifying_techniques_overview} (a)).
Notable methods for matrix decomposition include Isomap [@doi:10.1126/science.290.5500.2319], Laplacian eigenmaps [@doi:10.1162/089976603321780317] and Principal Component Analysis (PCA) [@doi:10/bm8dnf]/Singular Vector Decomposition (SVD) [@doi:10.1007/BF02288367].

> These methods were designed to be used on all types of data; however, we discuss them under the context of project knowledge graphs into a low dimensional space.	

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These methods were designed to be used on many different types of data; however, we discuss their use in the context of projecting knowledge graphs into a low dimensional space.	
```

SVD [@doi:10.1007/BF02288367] is an algorithm that uses matrix factorization to represent knowledge graphs in a low dimensional space.
The input for this algorithm is an adjacency matrix ($A$), which is a square matrix where rows and columns represent nodes and each entry represents the presence of an edge between two nodes. 
This adjacency matrix ($A$) gets decomposed into three parts: a square matrix $Σ$ and a set of two small rectangular matrices $U$ and $V^{T}$.
This values within $Σ$ are called singular values, which akin to eigenvalues [@doi:10.1007/BF02288367].
Each row in $U$ and each column in $V^{T}$ represents nodes projected onto a low dimensional space [@doi:10.1007/BF02288367; @doi:10/bm8dnf].
In practice $U$ is usually used to represent nodes in a knowledge graph, but $V^{T}$ can also be used [@doi:10.1007/BF02288367; @raw:Jiezhon2018].
Typically, SVD appears in recommendation systems via collaborative filtering [@doi:10.1155/2009/421425]; however, this technique can also be used as a standalone baseline to compare to other approaches [@arxiv:1906.05017].

> Laplacian eigenmaps is an algorithm that assumes there is low dimensional structure in a high dimensional space [@doi:10.1162/089976603321780317].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Laplacian eigenmaps assume there is low dimensional structure in a high dimensional space [@doi:10.1162/089976603321780317].
```
